---
layout: post
title: "Oauth 101"
date: 2016-12-25
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

OAuth (Open Authorization) is an open standard for token-based authentication and authorization on the Internet. Oauth protocol has two version : 
- OAuth 1.0
- OAuth 2.0

OAuth enables a third-party application to obtain limited access to an HTTP service, either on behalf of a resource owner by orchestrating an approval interactions between the resource owner and the HTTP service, or by allowing the third-party application to obtain access on its own behalf.

Below are some of the key advantages offered by OAuth 2.0 over 1.0:
<!--more-->
- More OAuth Flows to allow better support for non-browser based applications.
- OAuth 2.0 no longer requires client applications to have cryptography.
- OAuth 2.0 signatures are much less complicated. 
- OAuth 2.0 Access tokens are "short-lived". Typically the OAuth 1.0 token could be stored for a year or more.

### Purpose of Oauth

Lets take this as an example: A third party web application wants to search your email. Traditional approach would have involved sharing the password with the third part web app. Do this has many disadvantages to list a few: you are sharing you password, what if the thir part app gets compromised, what if you change the password and etc..

Oauth solves this problem by giving limited access to your resource, email in this case.

Another common use these days of Oauth is in banking system. Lets assume you want to buy some thing on groceries.com and you want to pay via your bank money.com. Will you share your password with groceries.com? well no, and oauth is the answer.

You the users (Resource Owner), ask groceries.com (client) to redirect to money.com (Authorization Server) where it will give limited access to deduct money (Oauth Token) from your bank account secured by money.com (Resource Server).

In doing so, groceries.com never sees your password!

### Basic terminology:
- RO (Resource Owner): Owns the resource, end user. When the resource owner is a person, it is referred to as an
      end-user.
- Client: Application or server requsting access to preotected resorce
- Resource Server (RS): Server where the actual protected data is residing.
- Authorization server (AS): Server that gives out the tokens
- Access Tokens: The token (credential used by client to access protected resources at the RS). This is issued by AS
- Authorization Codes: This is used to trade the access token.
- Refresh Tokens: Used by client to obtain a new access token when the old one expires. This is basically groceries.com asking if it is allowed to charge next month as well. If money.com AS says yes, it will issue an Refresh token which groceries.com will use to get a new access token once the old one has expired.
- Client Id: A value used by the Client to identify itself to the Service Provider
- Client Secret: A secret used by the Client to establish ownership of the Client ID

### Grant Type:

Grant Types are authorization grant which are credentials representing the resource owner's authorization (to access its protected resources) used by the client to obtain an access token.

There are four type of Grant Types:

1. Authorization Code
– Use case: Web-server apps (and native apps)
- The example above of groceries.com and money.com is example of Authorization Code grant type.
2. Implicit
– Use case: Browser-based apps
- In this the browser application redirects the user to AS
- User then authenticates (username and passowrd) and the authorizes(what all the client can do)
- AS then issues a token and redirects user back to client site.
3. Resource Owner Password Credentials
– Use case: Native mobile apps (for backwards compatibility)
- In this the client send username and passowrd which are then verified by AS
- In return, the AS sends back the token.
4. Client Credentials
– Use case: Server-Server
- In this, the client sends its own credentials to AS.
- In return, the AS sends back the access token.

### Refresh Tokens:

Refresh tokens are credentials or means used to obtain access tokens. Refresh tokens (RT) are issued to the client by the authorization server and are used to obtain a new access token when the current access token becomes invalid or expires, or to obtain additional access tokens with identical or narrower scope (access tokens may have a shorter lifetime and fewer permissions than authorized by the resource owner). RT's are optional and are at the discretion of the authorization server.  If the authorization server issues a refresh token, it is included when issuing an access token 

Refresh tokens are used in:
- Authorization Code
- Resource Owner Password Credentials

This is how the Refresh Tokens Work:
- When the access token expires or becomes invalid, the client sends its own credentials and refresh token to AS.
- In response, the AS returns back a new Access Token.


### References:
- https://hueniverse.com/introducing-oauth-2-0-b5681da60ce2
- https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6749