---
layout: post
title: "Terraform: New way of farming in cloud!"
date: 2017-02-25
---

### Terraform installation

Terraform is written in go lang. Each OS will have its executable named "terraform" which can be downloaded from https://www.terraform.io/. Just put the binary in $PATH variable and you are all set!


### HCL : HashiCorp Configuration Language
- Terraform is written in HCL which is a declarative languauge.
- HCL files are saved with .tf file extension.

### Providers:
- Terraform can provision instances/resources accross variety of cloud providers/platform such as google, AWS, VMWARE etc.
- These platforms are called as providers
- The most important platform of all is *aws*.

### Resource:
- Each provider has different resources it provides. Example, 'aws' provider has resources like security_group, instance.
- Resources creation has below syntax:

<pre>
resource "PROVIDER_TYPE" "NAME" {
[VARIOUS CONFIGS]
 }

Example:
resource "aws_instance" "vinwebsrv001" {
	ami = "ami-1234566"
	instance_type = "t2.micro"
}
</pre> 

### Terraform plan:
- Plan command will show you the changes terraform is going to do.
- (+) shows resources which it is going to add
- (-) shows resources it is going to delete
- (~) shows resources it is going to change


### Interpolation:
- Syntax for interpolation : "${things-to-interpolate}"
- Interpolation can be used to lookup an attribute of another resource

### Variables:
## Input Varialbes:
- Variables in terraform can be declared as below:
<pre>
	variable "NAME"
 	{
 		description = "Something that describes the variable"
 		type = "string|list|map"
 		default = "Put the default value for the given type of varialbe" 
	}

 </pre>
- Examples of variables:
LIST:
<pre>
	variable "List_variable"
 	{
 		description = "Something that describes the variable"
 		type = "list"
 		default = [1,2,3,4]
	}

 </pre>

MAP:
<pre>
	variable "map_variable"
 	{
 		description = "Something that describes the variable"
 		type = "map"
 		default = {
 			key1 = "value1"
 			key2 = "value2"
 		}
	}
 </pre>

- If no default is set for variable, you will be asked to set it during terraform plan.
- You can set the variable value on command line as: terraform plan -var variable_name="value"
- You can interpolate variable using the interpolation syntax: "${var.VARIABLE_NAME}"

## Output Variable:
- Output varialbes can be used to get values on the fly from any of resources.
- Example of Output variable:
<pre>
output public_ip {
	value = "${aws_instance.example.public_ip}"

}
</pre>
- You can see the output of variable using terraform output output_variable_name

## Data Source:
- A data source represents a piece of read-only information that is fetched from the provider every time you run Terraform.
- It uses the providers API (AWS API) to query the data
- Syntax is : "${data.TYPE.NAME.ATTRIBUTE}"

## Terraform State:

- Terraform saves information about what infrastruture it has created in Terraform State files.
- It will create a file with extension .tfstate in the current working directory.
- Its a JSON file.
- Example of what happens when you do a terraform apply:
<pre>
1. Lets assume you are creating a aws instance resource as below:
resource "aws_instance" "vinserv" {
	ami = "ami-1234567"
	instance_type = "t2.micro"
	}

2. When you do apply for the first time, terraform will spin the instance and then update the terraform.tfstate file which is in json format as below:

	"aws_instance.viserv": {
	     "type": "aws_instance",
	      "primary": 
	      {       "id": "i-12345555",
	              "attributes": 
	               {
	               "ami": "ami-1234567",
	               "availability_zone": "us-east-1e",
	               "id": "i-asdfasdfasd",
	               "instance_state": "running",
	               "instance_type": "t2.micro",
	               "network_interface_id": "********",
	               "private_dns": "something.ec2.internal",
	               "private_ip": "someip",
	               "public_dns": "somthing.pute-1.amazonaws.com",
	               "public_ip": "someip",
	               "subnet_id": "subnet-3b29db10"
	               }
	      }
	    }
3. Note that terraform has recorded the current state of the aws instance resource name vinserv

4. Now if you modify the config for the resource, and you run terraform plan, it will compare the new config with .tfstate and show you what is changing/being modifies/added.

- The state file is something internal to terraform and should never be modified. It can change with each version of terraform.

### 