---
layout: post
title: "S3"
date: 2020-11-23
categories: ['AWS']
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

# S3
1. S3 has six storage classes
   
    1. S3 Standard: 4x9 availability
    2. S3 Standarn Infrequent Access (IA): Use when retrieving infrequently like once a month: 99.9 availability
    3. S3 one Zone IA : Same as #2 only in single AZ: 99.5 availability
    4. S3 Intelligent Tiering: Based on AI move objects from Standard to IA
    5. S3 Galcier: Archive data; retrieval time from min to hours
    6. S3 Glacier Deep Archive: Retrival time uptop 12 hours

    You can select different storage classes for objects in same bucket.

| Storage Class | Retrieval Latency | Pricing (cents/GB) |Minimum Storage Duration Charge | Min Object size|
|-------|:------:|:------------------------:|:------------------------:|:------------------------:|
| S3 Standard | ms| 2.3 | NA | NA|
| S3 IT | ms| 1.25 | 30 | NA |
| S3 IA | ms| 2.3 | 30 | 128 KB |
| S3 IA 1 zone | ms| 2.3 |30 | 128 KB |
| S3 Archive | ms| Min to hours|30 | 128 KB |
| S3 Deep Archive | ms| 12 + Hrs |30 | 128 KB |

2. Pricing is affected by:
    
    1. Cross Region Replication
    1. .023 / GB / month
    4. Network in via internet free
    5. Network out to any AWS service in same region free
    6. Network Out to internet: .09/GB
    7. Put requests: .005/1000
    8. Get requests: .004/10000



3. S3 is object based storage and not block based storage.
4. MFA can be enabled on S3 objects
5. Eventual consistency for PUT but real time read write consistency for POST of objects
6. S3 key properties:

    1. Key value
    2. Version ID
    3. Metadata
    4. Subresources; ACL and torrent

7. S3 Provisioned Capacity Unit: Single unit costs $100 per month and gurantee 3 expedite retrivals every 5 mins with 150 MB/s throughput

8.  Transfer accelaration: copies data to edge location of s3 using cloudfront. Once the transfer accelaration is enables, you get accelarated endpoint of S3 bucket

9. S3 Permissions:

    1. Bucket level policy
        
        a. Bucket Policies: For bucket level perms
        b. ACL: For object level permissions
    2. Object level policy
    3. IAM user and role policy

10. S3 access logs can be enabled to be stored in same account or in other account

11. S3 encryption at rest:
    
    1. S3 managed keys - Server Side Encryption SSE - s3
    2. AWS Key Management Service - SSE - KMS
    3. SSE with custmer provides keys

    S3 encryption can be Done at object level and at bucket level


12. S3 versioning:
    
    1. Once enabled, cannot be disabled, only can be suspended. To disable, have to recreate the bucket
    2. Supports MFA for versioning.
    3. Deleting parent does not delete the version. You have to do a perm delete of all version. If you just delete the parent, it will just put delete marker.

13. Public access: 

    1. To access an object publicly, you have to make the bucket public and then the object public
    2. To access an public object version, you have to make it's version public explicitly. If the parent version is public, that does not mean that thre subsequent versions are public

14. S3 Lifecycle Management

    1. Can be set for all or prefix
    2. Can be used along with versioned of objects.

15. S3 object Lock
    
    1. Can be used for WORM model. 
    2. This can lock object once uploaded. This can be used for compliance
    3. Two modes: 
        
        1. Governance mode: YOu can specify which users can overide the locks
        2. Compliance mode: No one can overided the lock even root for the retention period
            Retention Period is the duration for which and object is going to be locked.

    4. Can be on bucket or on individual objects
16. S3 Performance

    1. S3 Prefix are nothing but the middle part between the bucket name and the object name.
    2. Per Prefix you can have: 
        
        3500 POST/PUT/COPY/DELETE request
        5500 GET/HEAD requests
    3. Thus, more prefix better performance
    4. When S3 - KMS is enabled, each upload and download will result in API call to AWS KMS service.  There is hard limit for number of API calls per region per account (5000, 10000 , 30000etc)
    5. S3 multipart upload: Good for files over 100 MB and requrired for files more than 5GB
    6. S3 byte range fetches: Used to parallize download. Can be used to just get few bytes of file


17. S3 Select is used only to query a single file stored in structured format such as JSON, CSV and Parquet. You are charge only for the selected data being transferred. 
18. 