---
layout: post
title: "HTML & CSS  Basics"
date: 2020-06-03
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
categories: ['Web Development']
---

CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets. Using CSS you style you web pages, describe presentation of webpages including the color, font, layout etc.

<!--more-->

# HTML Structure and tags

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
    <head>
        <title>Vins page</title>
        <link href="bobYourHead.css" rel="stylesheet">
    </head>
    <body>
        <p>My name is  </p>
        <p><em>Vinayak</em></p>
        <h1>My first web page</h1>

    <h2>What this is</h2>
    <p>A simple page put together using HTML</p>

    <h2>Why this is</h2>
    <p>To learn HTML</p>

    <h2>Where to find the tutorial</h2>
    <p><a href="http://www.htmldog.com">HTML Dog</a></p>
    </body>
</html>
```
- "<!DOCTYPE>" tag tells browser what type of document this is. In this case HTML 5.
- "< html >" everything in between html tag or element is the HTML document it self.
- The html tags can optionally have attributes attached to them.
- < head > element appears before < body > element. The information in head element does not appreat in browser window.
- < title > element is part of < head > element and this display the information about page in the browser window.
- < body > element contains everything a webpage has.
- < p > stands for paragraph, if you need to display thing on different line, use this.
- < br > is line break tag. Use < p > wherever possible instead
- < em > tag used for emphasis
- Heading tags : < h1 > tag is used only once is document. h2 - h6 can be used often
- < a > is the anchor tag href is the attribut with value of link to the page.
- < ul > is un-ordered list with < li> as list elements
- < ol > is ordered list
- < form > defines the form within a page. 
1. Form has action= attirbute which defines the detination for the form.
2. method attribute. The value can be post or get
3. input tag has type, name and value as attribute. Type can be: text, radio, submit etc. value is the defalut text in the inpiut box.
- < div > and < span > tags are used to group related HTML and mostly commly using with attributes "class" and id to associate the elelment with class or id css selector.
Span element/tag is used in-line whereas dev element is block-line and group large chunks of code.
```
<div id="scissors">
    <p>This is <span class="paper">crazy</span></p>
</div>
```
- < code > and < pre >: Code is used to represent and form of computer code. < pre > is used show preformatted text.
- < nav > : Purpose of nav tag is to provide navigation links either within the current document or to the other documents. Common examples are breadcrumbs menus at the top of pages etc.


# CSS
CSS can be applied in three diffrent way :
1. inline : using the style attribute:
```
<p stype="color: red"> My name is vin </p>
```

2. embeded or internal: This is used for the whole page. Declared inside the < head > element

```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<title>CSS Example</title>
<style>

    p {
        color: red;
    }

    a {
        color: blue;
    }

</style>
```
- This will make all paragrah red and links or anchors as blue

3. external: Separate file is used and saved like style.css with content:
```
 p {
        color: red;
    }

    a {
        color: blue;
    }
```
- the style.css is then specified in the < head > of the document:
```
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>My first web page</title>
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="style.css">
</head>
```
4. CSS class and ID selector: In the CSS, a class selector is a name preceded by a full stop (“.”) and an ID selector is a name preceded by a hash character (“#”).
```

#top {
    background-color: #ccc;
    padding: 20px
}

.intro {
    color: red;
    font-weight: bold;
}
```

This is how it is applied on HTML:
```
<div id="top">

<h1>This is vin</h1>

<p class="intro">This is vin in red and bold using the class CSS</p>

<p class="intro">Mmm mm mmmmm</p>

</div>
```

5. 