---
layout: post
title: "ec2"
date: 2020-12-19
categories: ['AWS']
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---


# Ec2 category and Type of Instances 

## Category

1. On Demand: By hour or per second pricing
2. Reserved: Upfront payment 1 year to 3 year. Steady state application where you can predict the load
    
    1. Standard Reserved Instances: This offer 75% off on deman instances. This cannot be moved across region
    2. Convertible Reserved Instances: These offer 54% off on demand instances. You can change instance type during your term as long it is greater or equal to current
    3. Scheduled Reserved instances: These are available to launch within the time windoes you reserve.

3. Spot Pricing: 
    1. You get the instance at cheap pricing which is coming from AWS excessive unused capacity. AWS will take back the instance when the pricing goes up and you are not willing to pay it.

4. Dedicated Hosts:
    1. Where multi-tenancy virtulization is not supported.

## Hypervisors
EC2 uses Nitro and Xen as the hypervisor

## Type

|Type| Usage|
|----|:-----|
| F | For FPGA|
| I | For IOPS|
| G | Graphics|
| H | Hish Disk Throghput|
| T | Cheap General Purpose|
| D | For Density|
| R | For RAM|
| M | Main Choice for General Purpose Apps|
| C | Compute Use|
| P | Graphics (same as G?)|
| X | Extreme Memory|
| Z | Extreme Memory and CPU|
| A | Arm Based|
| U | Bare Metal|

# General

1. The available Availability Zones for one account to other can differ
2. Ec2 security Keyps uses Asymmetric Encryption. Public Key goes on to Ec2 instance an Private Key is stored with the user.
3. System status check: Check the state of Hyperviser
4. Instance Status check: Check the state of the instance
5. When terminate protection is on, you cannot terminate the instance utill turned off.
6. Ec2 root Devide can be of type:

    1. General Purpose SSD GP2
    2. PIOPS
    3. Magnetic Disk

7. You can encrypt root volume
8. There are additional volumes you can attach: 

    1. Cold HDD
    2. Througput optimized HDD

# Security Groups
1. Changes on security grops takes effect immediately.
2. Security Grops are stateful. If you allow incoming for a given port and given IP, outbount is allowed by default.
3. You cannot block only allow. All traffic is blocked by default. Network ACLs allows this.


# EBS

|Type           |   Description     |      Use Case     |   API Name       |    Size    |   IOPS max | Price GB-Month|
|---------------|:------------------|:------------------|:-----------------|:-----------|:-----------|:-------|
|General Purpose SSD | | |gp2|
| Provisioned IOPS | | |io1|
| Throughput Opt HDD | | |st1|
| Cold HDD | | |sc1|
| EBS Mangnetic (Previous Gen) | | |standard|



1. Instance and volume need to be in same availability zone.
2. Modification on the existing volumes:
    
    1. Increase in volume size
    2. Change volumes to POIPS
    3. Move volue to other zone can be done via snapshots
3. Delete on termination is only on for root volume by default

# Snapshots

1. Snapshots exits on S3 and they are point in time copy of volumes.
2. Subsequent snapshots are incremental only copying the changes blocks to s3 for a given volume

# Instance Store

1. Also called as ephermal volume. 
2. Instances running with INstance store can only be terminated

# ENI vs EN  vs EFA

## ENI

    1. Virtual Network Card for ec2 instances
    2. You can add more ENI
    3. Each ENI has its Public, Private and MAC addresses

## EN

    1. Uses SR-IOV to provide high performance Networking capability. SR-IOV is a method of device virtulization which provides higher IO performance and lower CPU utilization over traditional device virtualization techniques.

    2. There are no additional charges for using EN

    3. Can be done via:

        1. using ENA: speed upto 100 Gbps
        2. Intel 82599 Virtual Function: 10 Gbps speed (legacy, not recommended and DNA is the way to go)

## EFA

    1. Elastic Fabric Adapter : This is over Fiber Optics rather than Network.
    2. Used for HPC or machine learning.

# Encrypted Root Volumes

1. You can now launch instances with encrypted root volumes
2. To convert and root volumes to encrypted, perform following:
    1. Create a snapshot of the root volume
    2. Copy the snapshot with encryption enanbled
    3. Create AMI from the encrypted snapshot.
    4. Launch instance from encrypted AMI
3. Encrypted Snapshots cannot be shared or made public.

# Spot instances

1. Flexible appliction where you are okay if the instance is terminated and can be launched after few minutes.
2. Process:
    
    1. Decide on the maximum spot price for an instance.
    2. Instance will be provisioned as long as spot price is below max Spot Price.
    3. Spot Blocks: You can set spot block upto six hours for a given instance. It will not termincate upto that time.

3. If an instance is terminated by AWS due to change in price, you are not charged for the remaining hour. However, if you terminate, they that hour is charged.


## Spot Fleets

    1. Type of spot instance request which contain both on demand and spot instances.


# Ec2 Hibernate

1. Process:

    1. When you hibernate and instance the RAM content are copied to EBS volume.
    2. These includes running processes any other data stored in RAM.
    3. When the instance is booted back from hibernation, the cotents are loaded back to RAM. 
    4. Thus, you do not need to start back the process or do any other configs.

2. The same instance ID is retained.
3. Operating system is not initialized.
4. You need to encrypt the root volumes to enable hibernation
5. instances cannot be hibernated for more than 60 days
6. Available for both on demand and reserved instances.

# Cloudwatch for EC2

1. CD Network
2. Cloudwatch with ec2 monitors events every 5 min default but can be changed to 1 minute after enabling detailed monitoring


# EC2 instance metadata

1. 169.25.169.254/latest/metadata or /latest/userdata/ /local-data contains the Instance metadata.
2. You can access common parmaters like : userdata, 
3. 
# Shared Storage
## EFS

1. Shared EBS storage which grows and shrik as needed.
2. This is essentially an NFS server using which you can share volumes across instances.
3. It used NFS v4
4. It is pay as you use (same as that of S3)
5. Linux has OS bypass which allows HPC applications to bypass kernel and directly connect with EFA device over Fiber optics channel. 

## Amazon FSx

1. Windows server that is Windows server Message3 Block (SMB)
2. It used SMB protocol.

## FSx lustre
1. For HPC and can storage to s3 directly.

# Ec2 placement groups

1. Placement grops can be used only for certain type of EC2 instances.
2. It is recommended to use same type of instances in a given placement group.
3. Existing instance can be moved to a placement group after stopping.

Three Types:

1. Clustered placement group: Grouping of instances within a single availability Zone to reduce network latency or/and to increase network throughput.
Unlike other groups, they cannot span across multiple Availability Zones.

2. Spread Placement Groups: 
    1. Each instance is kept on separate rack.
    2. You can have 7 instances per availability zone.
    
3. Patitioned Placement Groups: Group of instances spread across racks however, clustered. This way communication between the partions will have low network latency and high network 


# HPC

HPC is used for geomics, finance, autonomous driving etc.

AWS Service which enable HPC on AWS:
1. Ec2 with GPU and CPU optimized instances
2. EC2 Fleets (Spot instance and Spot Fleets)
3. Cluster Placement groups
4. EN: ENA, ENF

## Orchestration and automation
### AWS Batch
1. AWS Batch Enables developes to run hundreds of batch computing jobs on AWS
2. Single jobs can be split across multiple EC2 instances

### AWS Parallel Cluster

1. Opensource cluster management tool


# AWS WAF

1. Layer server firewall which can block traffic based on following conditions:

    1. IP addresses
    2. Country based IP addresses
    3. Values in headers
    4. Strings in requests
    5. Length of requests
    6. SQL code to avoid SQL injection
    7. Script to avoid cross site scripting

