---
layout: post
title: "Pandas-cheatsheet"
date: 2017-3-25
categories: ['Data Analytics']
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---


# ML Terms

- Target: This is something that you are trying to predict. Also know as dependent variable/response/y-variable(var on y axis)
- Features: Data attributes which are used to predict the targets. Also known as independent variables, predictors or x-variables.

- Correlation:
    - Line of best Fit: Represents the linear equation for the correlation.
    - A linear relationship can be strong positive or can be strong negative. Strong positive: Height vs arm length . Strong negative:  
- Regression Equation: Regression equation follows the same convention as that of linear equation.

    y-pred = Beta-0 + Beta-1 x x1

    Beta-0 = This is the value of y when x is zero (when the line is crossing the y axis). Or rather what was the starting point of what you were trying to predict. Example: If we are trying to predict the heigh of tree using its age, then we can use this logic. In this case, the height of tree when the age was zero would be zero, hence the Beta-0 is 0. In case of linear regression between size of home and area, the intercept zero does not makes any sense. This is because the cost of home with zero square footage would fall outside of our analysis.

    Beta-1 = This is the rate at which y changes when x is changing (The slope of the line)

- Residual/Error: The difference between predicted and actual value.

    - The residual/errors are calculated using SSE : Sum of Squared Errors.

- Squared errors: Represents the accuracy of our model. This is the 

